# Helm introduction

[Helm](https://helm.sh/) is a package manager for Kubernetes. It provides an easy way to `find, share, and manage` Kubernetes 
configurations. With Helm, you can:

- Deploy applications quickly and consistently.
- Version control deployments, enabling rollbacks to previous versions.
- Configure applications with different environments or options, using values and templates.
- Package complex applications that contain multiple components into a single Helm chart. 


It has a client server architecture:
- helm repo servers: A server which stores and distributes helm charts
- helm client


## 1. What is a helm chart?

Helm uses a packaging format called [charts](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/).  It’s essentially a collection of `YAML files and templates` 
that define a Kubernetes application and its dependencies. Charts make it possible to bundle multiple 
Kubernetes resources (like Deployments, Services, ConfigMaps, etc.) into a single package.

Each Helm chart typically contains:

 - **Chart.yaml** - Metadata about the chart, like its name, version, and description.
 - **values.yaml** - Default configuration values that the chart uses. You can override these values when 
                     installing the chart, allowing for flexible configuration.
 - **Templates** - A set of files defining Kubernetes resources (in YAML) with placeholders that get replaced 
                   based on values in `values.yaml`. Templates allow for dynamic configuration.
 - **README** - Documentation explaining the chart, how to configure it, and any dependencies it has.

> Finally, `a running deployed instance of a chart` with a specific config is called a **release**.


## 2. Install helm client

You can find the official installation doc [here](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/). You need to choose a version which is
compatible with your k8s cluster and your local OS(e.g. linux-amd64, windows-amd64, etc.).

The available version can be found [here](https://github.com/helm/helm/releases).

For example, in below example, we choose version `3.16.2`.

```shell
# get the source
wget https://get.helm.sh/helm-v3.16.2-linux-amd64.tar.gz


tar -xzvf helm-v3.16.2-linux-amd64.tar.gz

chmod a+x linux-amd64/helm

mv linux-amd64/helm /usr/local/bin/helm

# add the bitnami repo
helm repo add bitnami https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami
```

> Check [Artifact Hub](https://artifacthub.io/packages/search?kind=0) for all public available Helm chart repositories.

## 3. Creating your own chart

Now let's create a new chart with name `hello-world`

```shell
# below command creates a chart skeleton
# the name of the chart provided here (e.g. hello-world) 
# will be the directory's name where the chart is created and stored.
helm create hello-world

# check the content of the generated hello-world folder
tree -L 3 hello-world/
hello-world/
├── charts
├── Chart.yaml
├── templates
│   ├── deployment.yaml
│   ├── _helpers.tpl
│   ├── hpa.yaml
│   ├── ingress.yaml
│   ├── NOTES.txt
│   ├── serviceaccount.yaml
│   ├── service.yaml
│   └── tests
│       └── test-connection.yaml
└── values.yaml

```

Let's understand the relevance of these created files and folders:

- **charts**: This is an optional directory that may contain sub-charts
- **Chart.yaml**: This is the main file that contains the description of our chart
- **templates**: This is the directory where Kubernetes resources are defined as templates
- **values.yaml**: This is the file that contains the default config values for our chart
- **.helmignore**: This is where we can define patterns to ignore when packaging (similar in concept to .gitignore)

You can find the generated chart skeleton in [resources/harbor/helm/charts/hello-world](../../resources/harbor/helm/charts/hello-world/).

Here, we only modify the `values.yaml` to deploy it on a k8s cluster

### 3.1 Validating a chart

Before you deploy your chart, it's recommended that you valid your chart first (well-formed). You can use `helm lint` to do that. Below command is an example

```shell
helm lint ./hello-world

```

You can also render the generated k8s resource with the given default values.yaml

```shell
helm template ./hello-world
```

### 3.2 Deploy a release with helm chart
Once we've verified the chart to be fine, finally, we can below command to install the chart into the Kubernetes cluster

```shell
helm install --name chart-sample ./hello-world

# you can view the deployed release 
helm ls -all 

# upgrade your release with new setup
helm upgrade hello-world ./hello-world

# you can notice that after each upgrade, the revision number increase, so you can rollback
# with any number that inferieur than current. Below example will rollback to 1
helm rollback hello-world 1

# delete the release
helm uninstall hello-world

```

### 3.3 Distributing charts

Helm acts as a package manager for the Kubernetes application and makes installing, querying, upgrading, and deleting releases pretty seamless.

In addition to this, we can also use `Helm to package, publish, and fetch Kubernetes applications as chart archives`. We can also use the Helm CLI for this as it offers several commands to perform these activities. 

```shell
# after this command, you should see hello-world-0.1.0.tgz
helm package ./hello-world 
```

#### 3.3.1 Use github as helm repo

Finally, we need a mechanism to work with shared repositories to collaborate. There are several sub-commands available within this command that we can use to `add, remove, update, list, or index chart repositories`. Let's see how we can use them.

**We can create a git repository and use that to function as our chart repository. The only requirement is that it should have an index.yaml file**.

We can create index.yaml for our chart repo:

```shell 
# This generates the index.yaml file, which we should push to the repository along with the chart archives.
helm repo index my-repo/ --url https://<username>.github.io/my-repo

# After successfully creating the chart repository, subsequently, we can remotely add this repo:
helm repo add my-repo https://my-pages.github.io/my-repo

# Now, we should be able to install the charts from our repo directly:
helm install my-repo/hello-world --name=hello-world
```
#### 3.3.2 Use chart museum as helm repo

