# KeyStore and TrustStore

In this tutorial, we will: 
- overview Java keystore, truststore and their difference
- 

The following sections explain how to create both a **KeyStore and a TrustStore** (or import a certificate into an 
existing TrustStore such as the default Logical Host TrustStore in the location

## 1. What is a keystore?

A Java `keystore stores private key entries, certificates with public keys, or just secret keys` that we may use 
for various cryptographic purposes. It uses an `alias` to index each entry for ease of lookup.

Generally speaking, keystore hold keys that our application owns, which we can use to prove the integrity of a 
message and the authenticity of the sender, say by signing payloads.

If the server uses HTTPS, it looks up the private key from the keystore, and presents its corresponding public key 
and certificate to the client.

Similarly, if the client also needs to authenticate itself, a situation called `mutual authentication`, then the 
client also has a keystore and also presents its public key and certificate.

There’s no default keystore, so if we want to use an encrypted channel, we’ll have to set 
- **javax.net.ssl.keyStore** : specify the path of the keystore
- **javax.net.ssl.keyStorePassword**: specify the password of the keystore
- **javax.net.ssl.keyStoreType**: specify the keystore format If it is different than the default.

## 2. What is a truststore?

A java truststore holds onto certificates that identify others. We use them to build a trust list on the third party 
we’re about to communicate with. Java has bundled a truststore called `cacerts`. Until `java 8`, it resides in the
`$JAVA_HOME/jre/lib/security` directory, and since Java 9, it’s in `$JAVA_HOME/lib/security`.

```shell
# you can list the trust certificate with the below command
cd path/to/lib/security
keytool -list -keystore cacerts

# it may require a password, for example the default password for openJDK is changeit
# list all trusted certificate in your trust store
keytool -keystore "$JAVA_HOME/lib/security/cacerts" -storepass changeit -list
```

we can override the default truststore configuration:
- the `javax.net.ssl.trustStore`: overwrite the default location of the truststore
- `javax.net.ssl.trustStorePassword`: overwrite the default password
- `javax.net.ssl.trustStoreType`: overwrite the default truststore format

## 3. The keystore and truststore format

Normally, keystore and truststore are `password-protected files` that sit on the same file system as our 
running application. The default format used for these files was **JKS until Java 8**.

**Since Java 9, the default keystore format is PKCS12**. The biggest difference between JKS and PKCS12 is that 
`JKS is a format specific to Java`, while `PKCS12 is a standardized and language-neutral` way of storing 
encrypted private keys and certificates.

## 4. Creating a keystore in PKCS12 format

This section explains how to create a KeyStore using the JKS format as the database format for both the private key, 
and the associated certificate or certificate chain. By default, as specified in the `java.security` file, **keytool 
uses JKS as the format of the key and certificate databases (KeyStore and TrustStores)**. A CA must sign the 
certificate signing request (CSR). The CA is therefore trusted by the server-side application to which the Adapter 
is connected.

```shell
# 1. generate a private key and certificate pair with openssl


# After Step 1, you'll  have a key (server.key), a CSR (server.csr), and a certificate (server.crt). We'll be using
# server.key and server.crt files
# 2. Copy the private key and certificate to a .pem file
cat server.key > server.pem 
cat server.crt >> server.pem 

#  The Structure of server.pem file looks like this:
-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
(Private Key: domain_name.key contents)
-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
(Primary SSL certificate: domain_name.crt contents)
 -----END CERTIFICATE-----

# 3. Create .pkcs12 file.
openssl pkcs12 -export -in server.pem -out keystore.pkcs12 

keytool -list -v -keystore path/to/keystore.p12 -storetype PKCS12
```

> A .pem (Privacy Enhanced Mail) file is a container format that may just include the public certificate or the 
> entire certificate chain (private key, public key, root certificates).

## 5. Convert a jks keystore to a PKCS12 keystore

If you have legacy jks keystore, you can use the below command to convert it to pkcs12 format

```shell
# convert the format
keytool -importkeystore -srckeystore path/to/old_kstore.jks -destkeystore path/to/new_kstore.p12 -srcstoretype JKS -deststoretype PKCS12 -deststorepass [PASSWORD_PKCS12] 

# verify the content in the new generated keystore
keytool -list -v -keystore path/to/new_kstore.p12 -storetype PKCS12
# it will prompt to ask you to enter the password of the keystore

# 
```

## Import a CA root certificate into trust store

```shell
keytool -importcert -alias startssl -keystore $JAVA_HOME/jre/lib/security/cacerts -storepass changeit -file ca.der
```