# Configure ssh with pam, sssd and ad for authentication

This tutorial explains how to configure `sshd` to use `pam` as authentication method. Then `pam` delegate the authentication
task to `sssd`. `sssd` will call `sssd-krb5` for user authentication(auth_provider in sssd.conf), and call `sssd-ad` for getting 
user id, groups(gid)(id_provider in sssd.conf). Then the `nss` can use this information for creating user session after user login.

## 1. Install required packages

```shell
sudo apt install realmd sssd sssd-ad krb5-user winbind libnss-sss libpam-sss -y
```


### 1.1 realmd service
`realmd` is a service that discovers and joins a machine to `a Kerberos realm (AD domain)` automatically. It simplifies
`joining a Linux system to AD and configuring SSSD`.

Below are some useful commands of the realmd service

```shell
realm discover ad.casd.eu  # Discover AD domain
realm join --user=Administrator ad.casd.eu  # Join the linux server to AD
```

### 1.2 sssd (System Security Services Daemon)

The `sssd` daemon handles authentication and user information retrieval from AD, LDAP, or other identity providers.
It can cache user credentials, so users can log in even if the AD server is temporarily unavailable.
It integrates with `PAM (Pluggable Authentication Modules)` and `NSS (Name Service Switch)` to provide seamless 
authentication.

> You can use `sssd-tools`(A set of command-line utilities) for managing and debugging SSSD.
> 
```shell
# control and test sssd
sssctl
```

### 1.3 Required system packages

```shell
sssd: Daemons qui prendront en charge l'authentification et la résolution d'information utilisateur

realmd Daemon et outil qui servira à rejoindre le domaine

sssd-tools Outils qui permettra d'intéragir avec des objects sss

libnss-sss Bibliothèque pour l'interco de SSS avec NSS pour la résolution d'info utilisateur

libpam-sss Bibliothèque pour l'interco SSS dans PAM pour l'authentification

adcli Outils d'administration d'objets Active Directory

packagekit Outil de gestion de package : prérequis pour realmd

krb5-user Client Kerberos pour valider l'authentification de la machine sur l'AD

dig Client DNS
```

sssd：提供缓存和响应认证请求的服务。
sssd-ad：用于 AD 集成的 SSSD 插件。
krb5-user：Kerberos 客户端。
winbind：用于集成 Windows 域的用户和组信息。
libpam-krb5、libnss-sss、libpam-sss：用于 PAM 和 NSS 的库，以支持 SSSD。


```shell
sudo apt install sssd sssd-ad krb5-user
```