# Ubuntu network config

In Ubuntu, especially in modern versions (18.04 and later), network configuration and management are handled by a 
combination of tools and services: `Netplan, systemd-networkd (and its companion networkd-dispatcher), and NetworkManager`. 
These components can work together, or in some cases, be configured to work independently depending on the use case 
and environment (like servers or desktops).

## Netplan

Netplan is a utility for configuring networking on Ubuntu systems. It acts as a `unified front-end` for defining 
network configurations, which can then be applied by backend services like `systemd-networkd` or `NetworkManager`.

Netplan configurations are defined in YAML files located in **/etc/netplan/**. These files describe network 
interfaces, IP addresses, DNS servers, and routes.

Based on the configuration, Netplan can delegate the actual network configuration to either `systemd-networkd (commonly used on servers)` or `NetworkManager (commonly used on desktops)`.


When you run **sudo netplan apply**, Netplan processes the YAML configuration files and generates the necessary 
configuration files for the selected backend (either systemd-networkd or NetworkManager).
The backend then applies these settings to configure the network interfaces.


## systemd-networkd

**systemd-networkd** is a system service that manages network configurations on systems using `systemd`. It is often 
used in server environments or minimal installations where a lightweight and efficient network manager is preferred.

`If Netplan is configured to use systemd-networkd as its backend`, it will generate `.network` and `.netdev` files in
`/run/systemd/network/` based on the Netplan configuration. systemd-networkd then reads these files and configures 
the network interfaces accordingly.

**networkd-dispatcher**: This is a companion service that listens for network state changes managed by 
systemd-networkd and triggers custom scripts or actions based on these changes. It's useful for running 
scripts when certain network events occur, such as when an interface goes up or down.

## NetworkManager

**NetworkManager** is a more feature-rich network management service commonly used on `desktop environments`, where 
users need to easily switch between networks, manage Wi-Fi connections, VPNs, and other complex networking setups.

It provides a user-friendly tools like nm-applet in GNOME or other similar network applets, allowing users to manage 
network connections through graphical interfaces.

When Netplan is configured to use NetworkManager as its backend, it generates the appropriate configurations, 
and NetworkManager takes over the management of network interfaces.


## Default behavior

### Server Installations

Netplan typically configures `systemd-networkd as the backend`. This setup is lightweight and suitable for 
environments where stability and performance are key.


### Desktop Installations

On Ubuntu Desktop, Netplan is usually configured to use **NetworkManager as the backend**. This allows users to 
manage network settings through a `graphical interface` and benefit from the advanced features of NetworkManager.


### Default workflow for startup

1. Netplan Reads Configuration: During system startup, Netplan reads its YAML configuration files from /etc/netplan/.
2. Generate Backend Configs: Based on these YAML files, Netplan generates configuration files for either systemd-networkd or NetworkManager.
3. Apply Configurations: The selected backend (systemd-networkd or NetworkManager) then applies these configurations to set up the network interfaces.
4 .Networkd-Dispatcher (if using systemd-networkd): If systemd-networkd is in use, networkd-dispatcher may trigger additional scripts based on the network state changes.

> This workflow can be trigged manually by running the command **sudo netplan apply**
> 
> 
## Netplan config example

When you install a ubuntu desktop, a default netplan config is generated in `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml`. 
To disable it, you can use the below command:

```shell
sudo mv /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml.org
```

### Static IP config example

```shell
# find out the network interface name in your OS
sudo ip a 

# create a new network interface config file 
sudo vi /etc/netplan/01-netcfg.yaml 
```
Put the below content in the file

```yaml
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    eth0:
      addresses:
      - "10.50.5.90/24"
      nameservers:
        addresses:
        - [10.50.5.58, 8.8.8.8]
        search:
        - casd.local
      dhcp4: false
      dhcp6: false
      routes:
      - to: "default"
        via: "10.50.0.1"

```

- **eth0**: is the network interface name
- **addresses**: is used to configure IPv4 address on an interface. Make sure to define CIDR. You can add multiple addresses here
- **nameservers**: You can put multiple dns server in the name servers. 
- **routes**: This is used to set gateway on your system.

To apply the new config:


```shell
sudo netplan apply
```

