# Use Bandersnatch to build a private pypi repository

**Bandersnatch is a PyPI mirror client** according to `PEP 381 + PEP 503 + PEP 691`.
- [PEP 381](http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0381): Mirroring infrastructure for PyPI
- [PEP 691](https://peps.python.org/pep-0691/): JSON-based Simple API for Python Package Indexes
Version features:
  * bandersnatch >=6.0 implements PEP691
  * bandersnatch >=4.0 supports Linux, MacOSX + Windows

In this tutorial, we will use bandersnatch to mirror some python packages and server them as a `private pypi server`.
The official GitHub repo of [bandersnatch](https://github.com/pypa/bandersnatch|).
The official doc is [here](https://bandersnatch.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)


## 1. Install bandersnatch

It's recommended to install bandersnatch on a virtual env with a reserved uid

### 1.1 Prepare a Python venv

**To Run below command, the user need to have sudoer right**

```shell
sudo apt update

# install python interpreter
sudo apt-get install python3 -y

# install pip
sudo apt-get install python3-pip

# install venv
sudo apt-get install python3-venv

# create a user bandersnatch
sudo useradd -m bandersnatch -s /bin/bash

# change current user to bandersnatch
sudo su bandersnatch

# go to the folder which you want to create the venv.
# in this tutorial we choose ~/pypi/venv, to combine with our cron job script
sudo mkdir -p ~/pypi/venv

# change owner if you need, but optional
sudo chown -R bandersnatch:root ~/pypi/venv

# goto the venv folder
cd ~/pypi/venv

# create  a virtual env called bandersnatch
# don't use sudo here
python3 -m venv bandersnatch

# test the virtual env
# activate the venv
source bandersnatch/bin/activate

# to exit the venv, just type 
deactivate

```


### 1.2  Install the package

```shell
# install the package
pip install bandersnatch

# test the package
bandersnatch --help

```



## 2. Configure bandersnatch

When we run the command `bandersnatch mirror`, it will call a conf file that controls the mirror's behavior.
By default, this file is located at **/etc/bandersnatch.conf**. And the default user may not have the right to create or edit this file.

> To avoid the access rights problem, we recommend you use the below config file path to host the config

**To run the below commands, we suppose your uid is bandersnatch**

```shell
# create a folder to host bandersnatch conf
mkdir -p ~/pypi/conf

# create a folder to host the mirrored packages
mkdir -p ~/pypi/data

# create a folder to host the log
mkdir -p ~/pypi/log

# create a folder to host the releases
mkdir -p ~/pypi/export

# create the config file
vim ~/pypi/conf/bandersnatch.conf
```

> Run `bandersnatch mirror` for the first time - it will create an empty configuration file for you in /etc/bandersnatch.conf.
> If you add some packages in it and run second time, It will populate your mirror with the current status of all PyPI packages.
> It takes many disk storage and long time to finish if you take all pypi packages. 
> 
> This page https://pypi.org/stats/ will give you an idea how much storage you need to complete the mirror. For mirror
> the top 100 projects, it requires 23.6TB.

Now, put the below config file content in it.

The default location should be `/etc/bandersnatch.conf`. But you can put this config file where you like. For example,
in this tutorial, I put it in here `/home/bandersnatch/pypi/conf/bandersnatch.conf`

```ini
[mirror]
json = true
directory = /home/bandersnatch/pypi/data
master = https://pypi.org
workers = 4
timeout = 40
stop-on-error= false
hash-index = false

[plugins]
enabled =
  exclude_platform
  allowlist_project
  allowlist_release

[allowlist]
packages =
    pip
    pandas
    folium

[blocklist]
platforms =
     macos
     freebsd
     py2.4
     py2.5
     py2.6
     py2.7
```

> You will notice if you only mirror the above packages, you can not do the pip install correctly. Because packages
> also has dependencies. For example pandas require numpy to work, if you have pandas, but not numpy, pip install
> will fail. So you need to sync all the dependent packages of the required packages.
> To determine the complete package list is another challenge which we will address in another doc.

Now we can start the mirroring of the packages

```shell
# don't forget to activate the virtual env which contains the bandersnatch binary

# in our case, we provide the path of the config file 
bandersnatch -c /home/bandersnatch/pypi/conf/bandersnatch.conf mirror
```
After running the above command, you will notice bandersnatch start to download the packages. It will create a 
subdirectory under `/home/bandersnatch/pypi/data` called `web/`.  

## 3. Serve the package as a web server
After the `bandersnatch mirror` command finished, you should see the following file and directory generated
in the target folder which are defined in the `bandersnatch.conf`(directory = /home/bandersnatch/pypi/data). 
- generation (file)
- status (file)
- web (directory which contains all the packages and index)

All the packages are located in the `web` folder.

To server the packages, we need to set up a web server. The configuration of the web server must respect `PEP691 support`.
In this tutorial, we only show a nginx config example. Below is an example of the config.
Here we suppose that pypi.casd.local is the server url.

```nginx configuration

server {
    listen 80;
    server_name pypi.casd.local;

    # redirect http request to https
    return 301 https://$host$request_uri;

    }

server {
    listen 443 ssl;
    server_name pypi.casd.local;
    ssl_certificate /etc/ssl/certs/casd_k8s_wildcard.pem;
    ssl_certificate_key /etc/ssl/private/wildcard_key.pem;

    location / {
        root /data/pypi/data/web;
        autoindex on;
        charset utf-8;
        autoindex_exact_size off;
        try_files $uri $uri/ =404;
    }

}


```

Note that it is a good idea to have your webserver publish the HTML index files correctly with `UTF-8` as the charset. 
The index pages will work without it but if humans look at the pages the characters will end up looking funny.

Make sure that the webserver uses UTF-8 to look up Unicode path names. `nginx gets this right by default - not sure about others`.


> By default, pip only accept URL with **https**,  if your URL is in HTTP, you will have many problems. 
> So we highly recommend you to add a certificate to your nginx config

## 4. Test the Bandersnatch installation


### 4.1 Configure pip to use the private repo



pip uses a conf file to list all the hosts which it can download the packages, if your private repo is not in this list
pip will consider it as dangerous.

The configuration of pip is different based on the pip version

#### 4.2 Temporary Config



<code bash>
pip install <package-name> --index-url <repo-url> --trusted-host <repo-domain>

# for example, if the repo domain is pypi.casd.local and the repo URL is http://pypi.casd.local/simple
pip install pandas --index-url https://pypi.casd.local/simple --trusted-host pypi.casd.local
pip install ipykernel --index-url https://pypi.casd.local/simple --trusted-host pypi.casd.local
</code>

==== Permenent Config ====

=== For pip >= 10.0 ===


<code bash>
# set the index server url
pip config set global.index-url http://pypi.casd.local/simple 

# If the server is in HTTP, you need to add the below line to force pip to accept the domain
pip config set global.trusted-host pypi.casd.local

</code>

=== For older version ===


<code bash>
pip install --upgrade pip --index-url http://pypi.casd.local/simple --trusted-host pypi.casd.local
</code>

Or you can edit the configuration file manually.

<code bash>
# open the pip.conf file, find the global section 
[global]
index-url = http://pypi.casd.local/simple
</code>

Path of the per-user configuration file:

  * Linux: $HOME/.config/pip/pip.conf
  * macOS: $HOME/Library/Application Support/pip/pip.conf or $HOME/.config/pip/pip.conf
  * Windows: %APPDATA%\pip\pip.ini


=== For conda virtual env ===

For conda virtual env, you have two solutions:
  * provide a pip conf file for each virtual env
  * set a global conf file for all

== Individual conf file ==

<code bash>
# step 1: find the virtual env root path
conda info --envs
## You should see below output
# conda environments:
#
base                  *  /home/pengfei/anaconda3
PyQT-CRUD-App            /home/pengfei/anaconda3/envs/PyQT-CRUD-App

# step 2: create the pip.conf file
vim /home/pengfei/anaconda3/envs/PyQT-CRUD-App/pip.conf

# step3: add content to pip.conf
[global]
index-url = https://pengfei.org/simple
trusted-host = pengfei.org

# step4: check the conf
conda activate PyQT-CRUD-App
pip config list
# you should see below output
global.index-url='https://pengfei.org/simple'
global.trusted-host='pengfei.org'

</code>

== set a global conf file for all ==
<code bash>
# step1 : create a pip.conf file where you want, add some content

# step2: create a env var (add it to your bashrc if you want to make it perment)
export PIP_CONFIG_FILE=/home/pengfei/Downloads/pip.conf 

# step4: check the conf
conda activate base
pip config list
# you should see below output
:env:.config-file='/home/pengfei/Downloads/pip.conf'
global.index-url='https://pengfei.org/simple'
global.trusted-host='pypi.org'
</code>


=== For windows  ===

For Windows users, pip.ini config file is not created,  just create new %APPDATA%\pip\pip.ini and content of custom repository:
<code>
global.index-url='https://pengfei.org/simple'
global.trusted-host='pengfei.org'
</code>

To test it 

<code>
pip config list
</code>


===== Things that I don't like in bandersnatch =====

==== mirrored-files ====

Each time when you run **bandersnatch mirror** command, it will create a file called **mirrored-files** in the current directory.

If you changed directory and run **bandersnatch mirror** command again, it will not be able to locate previous **mirrored-files**. And it will not start the 
mirror process. As a result, no change will make.

You can use command **bandersnatch mirror --force-check** to overcome this. But sometimes, it does not work, you need to remove the wrongly generated **mirrored-files** file, then rerun **bandersnatch mirror --force-check**

==== No auto dependencies checks ====

There is no automatic dependencies checks. For example in the allow_list, if I put **pandas**, bandersnatch will only mirror the package source or wheel file of pandas. All the pandas dependencies (e.g. python-dateutil, numpy, six) will not be mirrored. When you installed, pip will show the error that it can find numpy, etc.

So we need to determine the dependencies manually and add all dependencies to the allow_list.  



