# Remote desktop access

If your linux runs on cloud, and you wish access this server's desktop interface, the below tutorial can help you.
I have tested three solutions:
- X2go: https://wiki.x2go.org/doku.php
- Nomachine: https://www.nomachine.com/
- xrdp:


## X2go and nomachine

If you have no other choice, these two solutions can be your last hope. They both have many bugs. The screen resolution
for example is a pain in the ass to setup correctly. Nomachine also requires admin rights on both client and server.

You can follow their official doc to install them.

## Xrdp

**xrdp** is a free and open-source implementation of `Microsoft RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol) server` that enables operating 
systems other than Microsoft Windows (such as Linux and BSD-style operating systems) to provide a fully functional 
`RDP-compatible remote desktop` experience. It works by bridging graphics from the X Window System to the 
client and relaying controls from the client back to X Window Server.


The initial versions of the XRDP project relied on a `local VNC server installation`. Due to the `slow performance` of 
forwarding to a VNC server, the developers introduced the **X11rdp mode**,  resulting in improved draw times and 
an overall better user experience. In 2019, the XRDP developers announced the **xorgxrdp** project as the replacement 
to the `X11rdp mode`, which is the default mode that XRDP uses in new installations.

You can visit their [github page](https://github.com/neutrinolabs/xrdp), if you are interested in how it works.

## Xrdp server side installation

This tutorial is tested under ubuntu 24.

```shell
# Step 1 – Update Ubuntu
sudo apt-get update -y

sudo apt-get upgrade #optional

# Step 2 – Install XRDP
sudo apt install xrdp -y
sudo systemctl status 

# Step 3 – Configure SSL
# xrdp daemon is lanuched by the service account xrdp, it requires certain privilege to access SSL/TLS certificates stored on the system.
# The below command add user xrdp to the group ssl-cert
sudo adduser xrdp ssl-cert

# restart the deamon
sudo systemctl restart xrdp

# Add a Firewall Rule to allow inbound and outbound traffic on port 3389
sudo ufw allow from 192.168.0.0/24 to any port 3389
sudo ufw allow 3389
sudo ufw reload 

# Step 4 – Test the XRDP connection
```

## Xrdp client side installation and configuration



